```
Seismic activity around Ngauruhoe has remained slightly elevated this last week. Visits were made to install additional seismic equipment and measure
fumarole temperatures.

Ngauruhoe unrest continues: Volcanic Alert Level 1
```

The Volcanic Alert Level was raised to Level 1 from Level 0 on March 20 in
response to the changes in earthquake activity, indicating minor volcanic
unrest. The GeoNet seismographs around Mt Ngauruhoe have continued to record
earthquake activity. Our analyses indicate these earthquakes are shallow,
occurring at depths of less than about 5 km. Since March 1 the number of events
per day has ranged from 1 to 67, which is similar to previous episodes between
2006 and 2010.

We have visited the summit crater and eastern outer rim to measure fumarole
temperatures and obtain thermal IR images (see below). GNS Science gas chemist
Agnes Mazot commented, “the temperatures in the summit crater and on the outer
eastern rim are unchanged from our previous visit in January 2015. The maximum
temperature measured was 87 °C, on the outer eastern rim. The temperatures in
this area have ranged 81 to 87 °C over the last 17 years”.

Thermal IR (InfraRed) images are one method of mapping heat flow over large
areas, some of which may not be accessible. The image below shows part of the
inner north wall of the summit crater. Collecting repeat images will allow us to
ascertain if there are any changes. The warmest area is the white area near the
centre of the image, being 35 °C.

![Thermal IR
image](http://info.geonet.org.nz/download/attachments/13664270/Thermal_IR.jpg?version=1&modificationDate=1427756337971&api=v2)
![Visual
images](http://info.geonet.org.nz/download/attachments/13664270/Inner_crater.jpg?version=1&modificationDate=1427756369623&api=v2)

Thermal IR image and visual image of the inner north wall of the summit crater,
27 March 2015.

The current change at Ngauruhoe indicates the volcano has entered a state of
volcanic unrest, like we have recorded several times in the last 30 years. No
previous periods of unrest have resulted in a volcanic eruption. The outcome of
this unrest is more likely than not that there will be no eruption in the short
term, like during the 2006-2010 unrest.

The last significant eruption at Ngauruhoe was in 1975.  Earthquakes are not
unusual near Ngauruhoe but it is some time since we last recorded significant
numbers or events above magnitude 1. Similar numbers, but smaller events
occurred in December 2014. Other swarms of earthquakes near Ngauruhoe occurred
in 1983, 1991, 1994, 1995 and again 2006-2010, but otherwise Ngauruhoe usually
has little earthquake activity.

We continue to monitor Ngauruhoe closely and will release updated information as
it is available or necessary.

The Volcanic Alert Level ranges from 0 to 5 and defines the current status at a
volcano.

The Aviation Colour Code for Ngauruhoe is Green. Aviation Colour Codes are based
on four colours and are intended for reference only in the international civil
aviation community.

GNS Science continues to closely monitor our active volcanoes through the GeoNet
project. http://www.geonet.org.nz/volcano

***Information Contact:***

Brad Scott
Volcanologist  07 3748211
